1. J Food Sci Technol. 2020 Feb;57(2):578-587. doi: 10.1007/s13197-019-04089-7. 
Epub 2019 Sep 11.

Evaluation of safety and probiotic properties of a strain of Enterococcus 
faecium isolated from chicken bile.

Shi Y(1)(2), Zhai M(1)(2), Li J(3), Li B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)1College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shandong Agricultural 
University, Tai'an, 271018 China.
(2)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology and Disease 
Control and Prevention, Tai'an, 271018 China.
(3)3College of Biology and Brewing Engineering, Taishan University, Tai'an, 
271021 China.

Probiotics are important bacteria due to their benefit on human health. In this 
study, four strains of lactic acid bacteria from chicken bile were isolated and 
the strain with the best antimicrobial activity was selected for further 
identification and evaluation on its probiotic traits and safety. The strain was 
identified as Enterococcus faecium by biochemical characterization and 16S rDNA 
gene sequencing. The strain, named E. faecium MK-SQ-1, was tolerant to acid (pH 
3.0), bile salts (up to 0.3%) or trypsin (up to 0.4%) for 3 h and it was able to 
survive from high temperature (up to 60 °C) for 15 min. This strain inhibited 
the growth of Salmonella enteritidis and Staphylococcus aureus intermediately. 
The genes responsible for virulence including asa1, cylA, efaA, esp, gelE and 
hyl were absent and the mice administrated orally with a very high dose (2 × 109 
CFU) of the strain daily for 35 days were not found abnormal. The strain 
enhanced the serum IgG level and phagocytic index of mice significantly by daily 
oral administration at a high dose (2 × 108 CFU) for 21 days (p < 0.05). The 
strain did not have multi-antibiotic resistance and vancomycin resistance. 
Comprehensive evaluation showed E. faecium MK-SQ-1 could be a candidate as a 
probiotic strain used in human or animals.

© Association of Food Scientists & Technologists (India) 2019.

DOI: 10.1007/s13197-019-04089-7
PMCID: PMC7016052
PMID: 32116367


2. Arch Tierernahr. 2001;54(1):1-17. doi: 10.1080/17450390109381962.

Growth behaviour of a spore forming probiotic strain in the gastrointestinal 
tract of broiler chicken and piglets.

Jadamus A(1), Vahjen W, Simon O.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Animal Nutrition, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Free 
University Berlin, Brümmerstrasse 34, D-14195 Berlin, Germany. 
jadamus@zedat.fu-berlin.de

The growth behaviour of the probiotic strain Bacillus cereus var. toyoi in the 
gastrointestinal tract of broiler chicken and suckling piglets was evaluated. 
The strain germinated rapidly in intestinal samples from both animal species. 
Less than 10% of spores were recovered from the chicken crop and piglet stomach, 
respectively. Lumen samples and mucosal tissues from the hind gut of piglets 
displayed increasing colonization of the probiotic strain throughout the trial 
period. After oral administration of vegetative cells to broiler chicken and 
weaned piglets, sporulation was detected in all intestinal samples. The 
distribution of spore CFU indicated repeated germination and sporulation during 
the intestinal passage in piglets. B. cereus var. toyoi was not able to colonize 
the intestinal tract of both animal species. However, the probiotic strain was 
detected in suckling piglets before uptake of B. cereus var. toyoi supplemented 
feed. It is concluded that B. cereus var. toyoi germinates rapidly in broiler 
chicken and piglets, which is a necessary prerequisite for its possible 
probiotic effects. Germination and in vivo sporulation of vegetative cells 
indicated that the probiotic strain was metabolically active in the intestine of 
both animal species.

DOI: 10.1080/17450390109381962
PMID: 11851013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Probiotics Antimicrob Proteins. 2017 Dec;9(4):415-424. doi: 
10.1007/s12602-017-9301-y.

Probiotic Characteristics of Lactobacillus curvatus DN317, a Strain Isolated 
from Chicken Ceca.

Zommiti M(1), Connil N(2), Hamida JB(1), Ferchichi M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Unité de Protéomique Fonctionnelle et Potentiel Nutraceutique de la 
Biodiversité de Tunisie, Institut Supérieur des Sciences Biologiques Appliquées 
de Tunis, Université de Tunis El-Manar, 1006, Tunis, Tunisia.
(2)Laboratoire de Microbiologie Signaux et Microenvironnement (LMSM) EA 4312, 
Université de Rouen, Normandie Université, 27000, Evreux, France.
(3)Unité de Protéomique Fonctionnelle et Potentiel Nutraceutique de la 
Biodiversité de Tunisie, Institut Supérieur des Sciences Biologiques Appliquées 
de Tunis, Université de Tunis El-Manar, 1006, Tunis, Tunisia. 
mounir.ferchichi@yahoo.fr.
(4)College of Applied Medical Sciences, Clinical Laboratory Department, King 
Faisal University, P.O. Box 401, Al-Ahsa, 31982, Saudi Arabia. 
mounir.ferchichi@yahoo.fr.

The probiotic characteristics of Lactobacillus curvatus DN317, a strain isolated 
from chicken ceca, were evaluated. This strain was selected for study from the 
isolated Lactobacillus strains because it has specific anti-microbial activity 
against Campylobacter jejuni ATCC 33560, Camp. jejuni NCTC 11168, Listeria 
monocytogenes ATCC 7644, and Bacillus subtilis ATCC 8633. Lact. curvatus DN317 
showed an auto-aggregation percentage of 72% and presented the highest 
co-aggregation with Lact. monocytogenes ATCC 7644 (68%) compared to B. subtilis 
ATCC 8633 (45%), Camp. jejuni ATCC 33560 (36%), and Camp. jejuni NCTC 11168 
(35%). The data revealed that Lact. curvatus DN317 could survive at 0.25% bile, 
maintain viability at pH 2.5 for 30 min, produce biosurfactants, and adhere to 
Caco-2 cells. Quantification of IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, and β-defensin 2 levels shows 
that Lact. curvatus DN317 induces an increase in IL-8 and β-defensin 2 
secretion, while the levels of IL-6 and IL-10 do not change. Lact. curvatus 
DN317 showed high levels of esterase and cysteine arylamidase activities (5); 
moderate levels of esterase lipase, β-galactosidase, and α-galactosidase 
activities (4, 3); and weak levels of leucine arylamidase, valine arylamidase, 
and acid phosphatase activity (1). Various activities were obtained of 
α-chymotrypsin, β-glucuronidase, β-glucosidase, and N-acetyl-β-glucosaminidase, 
which have been associated with intestinal diseases. Lact. curvatus DN317 
lowered the cholesterol level in MRS with and without bile. Antibiotic 
susceptibility tests indicated that DN317 was sensitive to ampicillin, 
gentamicin, kanamycin, streptomycin, tetracycline, clindamycin, erythromycin, 
and vancomycin but was resistant to chloramphenicol and ciprofloxacin. These 
results suggest that Lact. curvatus DN317 could potentially function as a 
probiotic.

DOI: 10.1007/s12602-017-9301-y
PMID: 28741151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Front Physiol. 2019 Jul 25;10:937. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2019.00937. eCollection 
2019.

Probiotic Properties of Lactobacillus paracasei subsp. paracasei L1 and Its 
Growth Performance-Promotion in Chicken by Improving the Intestinal Microflora.

Xu Y(1), Tian Y(1), Cao Y(2), Li J(1), Guo H(1), Su Y(1), Tian Y(1), Wang C(1), 
Wang T(1), Zhang L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Science and Engineering, Jinzhou Medical University, 
Jinzhou, China.
(2)Tianwang Animal Health Supervision Institute, Jinzhou Economic and 
Technological Development Zone, Jinzhou, China.

Lactobacillus paracasei subsp. paracasei L1 was previously isolated from sweet 
potato sour liquid. This bacterial species specifically binds onto starch 
granular surfaces, triggering the enzymatic hydrolysis of raw starch. We 
investigated the functional and safety properties of strain L1 in vitro to 
establish its probiotic potential, and analyzed its effect on growth performance 
and intestinal microflora of chicken in feeding experiments. The optimal growth 
conditions of strain L1 included low pH and high concentrations of bile salts 
and NaCl. Its 1-, 2-, and 24-h autoaggregation values were 15.8 ± 1.2%, 20.4 ± 
2.3%, and 47.2 ± 0.8%, respectively, with the surface hydrophobicity value at 
560 nm of 38.1 ± 2.7%. Further, its adhesion rate to Caco-2 cells was 22.37 ± 
1.44%. Strain L1 was resistant to erythromycin and azithromycin, but sensitive 
to other antibiotics tested. For the feeding experiments, 240 chickens with 
similar weights were randomly divided into a control (C) group and strain L1 (L) 
group and fed for 8 weeks. Strain L1 promoted the weight gain of chickens in L 
group. A significant increase in the population size of the two phyla and 23 
genera in the small intestine was observed in the presence of strain L1 (P < 
0.05), with 0 phyla and 4 genera showing significant increase in the cecum (P < 
0.05). In the small intestine, the abundance of six functional genes at Kyoto 
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) level 2 and 49 genes at KEGG level 3 
was significantly increased in group L (P < 0.05), with lesser changes noted in 
the cecum. An increase in the metabolic pathway functions, including enzyme 
families and the digestive system, was observed in the intestinal microbiota in 
the L group compared to the C group. However, the other metabolic pathway 
functions, including metabolism of fatty acid biosynthesis, as well as 
metabolism of glycerolipids and propanoate, increased in the cecal microbiota of 
the L group relative to the C group. These changes are most likely related to 
the changes in the gut microbiota composition. Collectively, strain L1 
supplementation may promote growth performance and improve the intestinal 
microflora in chicken although further studies are needed to confirm this.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2019.00937
PMCID: PMC6670285
PMID: 31404251


5. J Sci Food Agric. 2019 Jul;99(9):4309-4318. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.9664. Epub 2019 
Apr 1.

Probiotic microorganisms detoxify ochratoxin A in both a chicken liver cell line 
and chickens.

Markowiak P(1), Śliżewska K(1), Nowak A(1), Chlebicz A(1), Żbikowski A(2), 
Pawłowski K(2), Szeleszczuk P(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Fermentation Technology and Microbiology, Faculty of 
Biotechnology and Food Sciences, Lodz University of Technology, Lodz, Poland.
(2)Department of Pathology and Veterinary Diagnostics, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, Warsaw University of Life Sciences - SGGW, Warsaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: The administration of probiotics and prebiotics (synbiotics) is a 
promising method for detoxification of ochratoxin A (OTA) in animals. The aim of 
this study was to investigate the ability of five probiotic strains of lactic 
acid bacteria (LAB) and one Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast strain, from three 
different synbiotics for poultry, to detoxify OTA. In addition, we also 
investigated the genotoxicity of faecal water (FW) of chickens after 
administering OTA and/or synbiotics for 42 days.
RESULTS: All tested LAB and yeast strains had the ability to detoxify OTA by 
significant (P < 0.05) reducing its concentration (by 31.3-47.7% and 31.9%, 
respectively, after 24 h incubation) and genotoxicity (by 22.6-51.8% and 52.7%, 
respectively). Synbiotics composed of four and five probiotic strains 
significantly (P < 0.05) decreased FW genotoxicity of chicks, after exposure to 
OTA, to the level seen in the control group (21.8% ± 1.7%) and were more 
effective than synbiotics composed of three probiotic strains (31.5%).
CONCLUSION: These results showed that there was a beneficial effect of the 
synbiotics on the gastrointestinal tract of animals. Furthermore, synbiotic 
preparations containing four or five of tested strains can be considered as 
preventive agents in the contamination of poultry with OTA. © 2019 Society of 
Chemical Industry.

© 2019 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.9664
PMID: 30828814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol. 2008;14(1-3):115-22. doi: 10.1159/000106090.

Characterization of cecal microbiota and response to an orally administered 
lactobacillus probiotic strain in the broiler chicken.

Gérard P(1), Brézillon C, Quéré F, Salmon A, Rabot S.

Author information:
(1)Unité d'Ecologie et Physiologie du Système Digestif, Institut National de la 
Recherche Agronomique, Jouy-en-Josas, France. philippe.gerard@jouy.inra.fr

A probiotic Lactobacillus strain was given in drinking water to young broiler 
chickens from 1 to 19 days of age. Cecal contents were collected from 4- and 
19-day-old chickens in treated and control groups. Enumeration of bacteria by 
culture on selective media showed a decrease in Clostridium perfringens carriage 
in the 4-day-old treated chickens, whereas coliforms and Lactobacillus 
populations were not significantly affected by the treatment. Fluorescent in 
situ hybridization analysis with 7 phylogenetic probes targeting the major 
groups of intestinal bacteria revealed that the Clostridium coccoides group 
accounted for more than 50% of the total bacteria in the cecum of 4-day-old 
chickens, whereas the bacterial community of 19-day-old chickens evolved towards 
a more diverse microbiota with Faecalibacterium prausnitzii (36%) and C. 
coccoides (22%) groups representing the predominant bacteria. No effect of the 
Lactobacillus strain supplementation was observed in the composition of the 
cecal microbiota assessed by fluorescent in situ hybridization with the 7 
probes. Nevertheless, profiling of the cecal microbiota using temporal 
temperature gradient gel electrophoresis in combination with principal component 
analysis demonstrated an impact of the probiotic treatment on the overall 
bacterial community as well as on the Lactobacillus population.

DOI: 10.1159/000106090
PMID: 17957118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Anim Sci J. 2020 Jan-Dec;91(1):e13436. doi: 10.1111/asj.13436.

Lactobacillus ingluviei C37 from chicken inhibits inflammation in LPS-stimulated 
mouse macrophages.

Tsukagoshi M(1), Sirisopapong M(2), Namai F(1), Ishida M(1), Okrathok S(2), 
Shigemori S(1), Ogita T(1), Sato T(1), Khempaka S(2), Shimosato T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Innovation, Institute for Biomedical Sciences, 
Shinshu University, Nagano, Japan.
(2)School of Animal Technology and Innovation, Institute of Agricultural 
Technology, Suranaree University of Technology, Nakhon Ratchasima, Thailand.

Probiotics are growing alternatives to antibiotics, and can contribute to the 
prevention and treatment of diseases and enhance livestock production. 
Lactobacillus (L.) ingluviei is a novel probiotic species with 
growth-enhancement effects; however, this species remains poorly understood, and 
there have been (to our knowledge) no studies focusing on its immunological 
effects. Here, we isolated L. ingluviei C37 (LIC37) from chicken and evaluated 
the bacterium's immunomodulatory properties to explore its probiotic potential. 
Real-time quantitative PCR and ELISA showed that in vitro exposure of 
inflammation-stimulated mouse peritoneal macrophages to heat-killed LIC37 led to 
decreases in tumor necrosis factor-α and interleukin (IL)-6 levels and an 
increase in IL-10. These findings suggested that LIC37 exerts anti-inflammatory 
effects by modulating cytokine profiles. This species may be an attractive 
probiotic bacterial strain for use in animal production.

© 2020 Japanese Society of Animal Science.

DOI: 10.1111/asj.13436
PMID: 32761774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Animals (Basel). 2020 Sep 2;10(9):1555. doi: 10.3390/ani10091555.

Comparative Effects of Using New Multi-Strain Synbiotics on Chicken Growth 
Performance, Hematology, Serum Biochemistry and Immunity.

Żbikowski A(1), Pawłowski K(1), Śliżewska K(2), Dolka B(1), Nerc J(1), 
Szeleszczuk P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Veterinary Diagnostics, Institute of Veterinary 
Medicine, Warsaw University of Life Sciences-SGGW, Nowoursynowska 159c St., 
02-776 Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Biotechnology and Food Sciences, Institute of Fermentation 
Technology and Microbiology, Lodz University of Technology, Wolczanska 171/173, 
90-924 Lodz, Poland.

In this study, the influence of new multi-strain synbiotics on chicken growth 
performance, hematology, serum biochemistry and immunity was explored. Each 
synbiotic preparation (A, B and C) comprised three, four or five strains of 
Lactobacillus sp., respectively, as well as S. cerevisiae and inulin. All 
strains used in the synbiotics originated from wild-type strains from animal 
farms in Poland. Six groups of chickens, ROSS 308 line, were fed with three 
different synbiotics at a dose of 0.5 g/1 kg of feed. Body weight, as well as 
the biochemical and hematological parameters of the animals in each study group, 
were determined on the 7th, 14th, 28th and 42nd day of life. Body weight on day 
42 differed between groups and was the highest in control group. This group also 
had the highestfeed conversion ratio (FCR) value. All measured biochemical 
parameters were in the normal ranges for poultry; however, we observed a lower 
alkaline phosphatase (AP) concentration on day 7 in the groups fed with 
synbiotics, which correlated with a lower level of triglycerides in those 
groups. The aspartate transaminase (AST) concentration was significantly lower 
in all groups on day 42 in comparison with the control. On day 7, the control 
group showed the highest concentration of Ca, K and P. Other parameters did not 
differ significantly throughout the experiment. All groups showed a similar 
tendency of increase in the red blood cells (RBC) count according to the age of 
the birds. Every white blood cells (WBC) population showed differences in the 
proportions between T and B lymphocytes. The T cell and monocyte counts 
increased until day 28 in all groups. The results showed that our newly 
developed synbiotic formulas do not have any unfavorable influence on chicken 
health and may modulate immune response and biochemical parameters. However, 
this hypothesis needs to be evaluated in future experiments.

DOI: 10.3390/ani10091555
PMCID: PMC7552141
PMID: 32887290

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


9. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2018 Jun 28;28(6):883-892. doi: 10.4014/jmb.1802.02019.

Probiotic Potential of Enterococcus faecium Isolated from Chicken Cecum with 
Immunomodulating Activity and Promoting Longevity in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Sim I(1)(2), Park KT(3), Kwon G(4), Koh JH(5), Lim YH(1)(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrated Biomedical and Life Sciences, College of Health 
Science, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory Science, Kyungdong University, Wonju 26495, 
Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Research and Development Center, Milae Resources ML Co. Ltd., 
Seoul 05542, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Public Health Science (BK21 PLUS Program), Graduate School, 
Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Bio-Food Analysis and Processing, Bio-Campus Korea Polytechnic 
College, Nonsan 32943, Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Korea University Guro Hospital, Seoul 
08308, Republic of Korea.

Probiotics, including Enterococcus faecium, confer a health benefit on the host. 
An Enterococcus strain was isolated from healthy chicken cecum, identified as E. 
faecium by 16S rDNA gene sequence analysis, and designated as E. faecium L11. To 
evaluate the potential of E. faecium L11 as a probiotic, the gastrointestinal 
tolerance, immunomodulatory activity, and lifespan extension properties of the 
strain were assayed. E. faecium L11 showed >66% and >62% survival in artificial 
gastric juice (0.3% pepsin, pH 2.5) and simulated small intestinal juice (0.5% 
bile salt and 0.1% pancreatin), respectively. Heat-killed E. faecium L11 
significantly (p < 0.05) increased immune cell proliferation compared with 
controls, and stimulated the production of cytokines (IL-6 and TNF-α) by 
activated macrophages obtained from ICR mice. In addition, E. faecium L11 showed 
a protective effect against Salmonella Typhimurium infection in Caenorhabditis 
elegans. In addition, feeding E. faecium L11 significantly (p < 0.05) extended 
the lifespan of C. elegans compared with the control. Furthermore, genes related 
to aging and host defense were upregulated in E. faecium L11-fed worms. In 
conclusion, E. faecium L11, which prolongs the lifespan of C. elegans, may be a 
potent probiotic supplement for livestock.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.1802.02019
PMID: 29642285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 27;9(2):e90208. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090208. 
eCollection 2014.

Development of a strain-specific real-time PCR assay for enumeration of a 
probiotic Lactobacillus reuteri in chicken feed and intestine.

Sattler VA(1), Mohnl M(2), Klose V(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Natural Resources and Applied Life Sciences, Department for 
Agrobiotechnology, Tulln, Austria.
(2)BIOMIN Research Center, Tulln, Austria.

A strain-specific real-time PCR assay was developed for quantification of a 
probiotic Lactobacillus reuteri (DSM 16350) in poultry feed and intestine. The 
specific primers were designed based on a genomic sequence of the strain derived 
from suppression subtractive hybridization with the type strain L. reuteri DSM 
20016. Specificity was tested using a set of non-target strains from several 
sources. Applicability of the real-time PCR assay was evaluated in a controlled 
broiler feeding trial by using standard curves specific for feed and intestinal 
matrices. The amount of the probiotic L. reuteri was determined in feed from 
three feeding phases and in intestinal samples of the jejunum, ileum, and caecum 
of three, 14, and 39 day old birds. L. reuteri DSM 16350 cells were enumerated 
in all feeds supplemented with the probiotic close to the inclusion rate of 7.0 
× 10(3) cfu/g, however, were not detected in L. reuteri DSM 16350 free feed. In 
three day old birds L. reuteri DSM 16350 was only detected in intestinal samples 
from probiotic fed animals ranging from 8.2 ± 7.8 × 10(5) cfu/g in the jejunum, 
1.0 ± 1.1×10(7) cfu/g in the ileum, and 2.5 ± 5.7 × 10(5) cfu/g in the caecum. 
Similar results were obtained for intestinal samples of older birds (14 and 39 
days). With increasing age of the animals the amount of L. reuteri signals in 
the control animals, however, also increased, indicating the appearance of 
highly similar bacterial genomes in the gut microbiota. The L. reuteri DSM 16350 
qPCR assay could be used in future for feeding trials to assure the accurate 
inclusion of the supplement to the feed and to monitor it's uptake into the GIT 
of young chicken.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090208
PMCID: PMC3937354
PMID: 24587284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: This work was done in 
cooperation with the company BIOMIN, who provided the probiotic strain and 
housing facility for the feeding trial. However, the authors confirm that this 
does not alter their adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and 
materials.


11. Arch Microbiol. 2021 Mar;203(2):847-853. doi: 10.1007/s00203-020-02088-3. Epub 
2020 Oct 17.

Inclusion of Lactobacillus salivarius strain revealed a positive effect on 
improving growth performance, fecal microbiota and immunological responses in 
chicken.

Sureshkumar S(1)(2), Lee HC(1), Jung SK(1), Kim D(3), Oh KB(1), Yang H(1), Jo 
YJ(1), Lee HS(1), Lee S(3), Byun SJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Animal Biotechnology Division, National Institute of Animal Science, Rural 
Development Administration, 1500, Wanju-gun, 441-706, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Animal Resource and Science, Dankook University, Cheonan-si, 
Chungnam, 31116, South Korea.
(3)Department of Integrative Biotechnology, Sungkyunkwan University, 2066, 
Seobu-ro, Jangan-gu, Suwon-si, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea.
(4)Animal Biotechnology Division, National Institute of Animal Science, Rural 
Development Administration, 1500, Wanju-gun, 441-706, Republic of Korea. 
pcs1778@korea.kr.

Probiotics are defined as live microorganisms that when administered in an 
appropriate amount, provide health benefits to the host. This study aimed to 
evaluate the effect of the oral administration of Lactobacillus salivarius (L. 
salivarius) on growth performance, immunological responses, fecal microbial 
flora and intestinal mucosal morphology in chickens. Chickens were fed with 109 
colony-forming units (CFUs) of wild-type (WT) L. salivarius or 
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 5 weeks. Chickens body weight was 
significantly increased by administration of L. salivarius groups compared than 
control group. The microbial taxonomy in the small intestine and cecum was 
identified via the chicken feces sample. A total of 286,331 bacterial species 
were obtained from the chicken fecal samples in overall experimental group. From 
these, 145,012 bacterial species were obtained from oral administration of L. 
salivarius treatment group, while 141,319 bacterial species were obtained from 
control group. Almost 98% of all 16S rRNA sequences from the chicken fecal 
sample of the two groups were classified into known phyla. Firmicutes, 
Cyanobacteria, Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes and Actinobacteria were highly 
abundant in both groups. Compared with the control birds, the chickens orally 
administered L. salivarius showed no significant differences in villus length 
and crypt length. Serum concentrations of the cytokines IL-8, TNF-α, IFN-γ, and 
IL-4 were markedly reduced in the L. salivarius group. In summary, our findings 
reveal that L. salivarius can act as a potential probiotic to improve 
performance and overall gut health in of chickens.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-020-02088-3
PMID: 33068123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Poult Sci. 2020 Jan;99(1):526-535. doi: 10.3382/ps/pez549. Epub 2019 Dec 30.

Antimicrobial peptide presenting potential strain-specific real time polymerase 
chain reaction assay for detecting the probiotic Lactobacillus reuteri KUB-AC5 
in chicken intestine.

Sobanbua S(1), Dolkittikul S(1), Nakphaichit M(2), Keawsompong S(2), 
Nitisinprasert S(3).

Author information:
(1)Specialized Research Unit: Prebiotics and Probiotics for Health, Department 
of Biotechnology, Faculty of Agro-Industry, Kasetsart University, Lat Yao, 
Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900, Thailand.
(2)Specialized Research Unit: Prebiotics and Probiotics for Health, Department 
of Biotechnology, Faculty of Agro-Industry, Kasetsart University, Lat Yao, 
Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900, Thailand; Center for Advanced Studies for Agriculture 
and Food (CASAF), Kasetsart University Institute for Advanced Studies (NRU-KU), 
Kasetsart University, Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900, Thailand.
(3)Specialized Research Unit: Prebiotics and Probiotics for Health, Department 
of Biotechnology, Faculty of Agro-Industry, Kasetsart University, Lat Yao, 
Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900, Thailand; Center for Advanced Studies for Agriculture 
and Food (CASAF), Kasetsart University Institute for Advanced Studies (NRU-KU), 
Kasetsart University, Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900, Thailand. Electronic address: 
fagisnn@ku.ac.th.

The gene coding for antimicrobial peptides produced by probiotic Lactobacillus 
reuteri KUB-AC5 located on the cloned DNA fragment I-C46 containing 2 open 
reading frames I-C46-F2.1 and I-C46-F2.2 were designed for strain-specific 
primers P1 and P2, respectively, and assessed by real-time quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction. According to the obtained results, primer P1 has 
limited strain specificity. Primer P2 exhibited high efficacy and specificity at 
annealing temperature of 70°C while P1 annealed at 57°C causing nonspecific 
bands. Hence, P2 was selected for quantitative polymerase chain reaction assay 
by isothermal annealing and extension reaction at high temperature of 70°C 
resulting in linearity for its DNA sequences ranging from 102 to 107 target copy 
numbers per assay, and displaying a detection limit of 6.17 log cfu/g of cecal 
digesta. Using spike testing, this system was able to detect 7.88 ± 0.06 to 
11.78 ± 0.06 log copy number/g of digesta, higher than cultivation assay at 
about 1 log cfu/g, with good correlation of 0.99. These results suggested 
possible detection of strain KUB-AC5 in the gastrointestinal tract of chicken to 
evaluate the efficacy and persistence of a probiotic strain which requires 
correct inclusion rates in the feed.

Copyright © 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3382/ps/pez549
PMCID: PMC7587613
PMID: 32416839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS One. 2016 Dec 1;11(12):e0167339. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0167339. 
eCollection 2016.

Dietary Probiotic Bacillus subtilis Strain fmbj Increases Antioxidant Capacity 
and Oxidative Stability of Chicken Breast Meat during Storage.

Bai WK(1), Zhang FJ(1), He TJ(1), Su PW(1), Ying XZ(1), Zhang LL(1), Wang T(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University, 
Xuanwu District, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

This study was aimed to measure the dietary effects of probiotic Bacillus 
subtilis strain fmbj (BS fmbj) on antioxidant capacity and oxidative stability 
of chicken breast meat during storage. Treatment groups were fed the basal diet 
with BS fmbj at 0 g/kg (CON), 0.2 g/kg (BS-1), 0.3 g/kg (BS-2), or 0.4 g/kg 
(BS-3) doses without antibiotics. During 8 days of storage at 4°C, BS-2 group 
showed a significant improvement (P < 0.05) on meat quality (pH, Drip loss, 
Cooking loss, Shear force, color L*, a*, b*), free radical scavenging activity 
(DPPH, ABTS+, H2O2), tissues antioxidant enzyme capacity (SOD, CAT, GSH-Px, GSH, 
T-SH), mitochondria antioxidant enzyme capacity (MnSOD, GPx, GSH), mRNA 
expression of antioxidant genes (Nrf2, HO-1, SOD, CAT, GSH-Px) and mitochondrial 
function genes (avUCP, NRF1, NRF2, TFAM, PGC-1α), oxidative damage index (MDA, 
ROS, PC, 8-OHdG), and MMP level in chicken breast meat as compared to the CON 
group. These results indicate that dietary BS fmbj in broiler diets can protect 
breast meat against the storage-induced oxidative stress by improving their free 
radical scavenging capacity and antioxidant activity during 8 days of storage at 
4°C.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0167339
PMCID: PMC5132206
PMID: 27907152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


14. Poult Sci. 2004 Jan;83(1):45-8. doi: 10.1093/ps/83.1.45.

Characterization and electrotransformation of Lactobacillus crispatus isolated 
from chicken crop and intestine.

Beasley SS(1), Takala TM, Reunanen J, Apajalahti J, Saris PE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Microbiology, Department of Applied Chemistry and Microbiology, 
University of Helsinki, 00014-FIN, Finland.

Lactic acid bacteria originating in the intestine have recently undergone 
intensive study for their potential probiotic properties. Here partial 16S rRNA 
gene sequencing of 8 Lactobacillus strains proved them to be Lactobacillus 
crispatus. Fatty acid analysis confirmed strains being closely related. These 
strains and type strain ATCC33820 were characterized for genetic engineering 
potential, thus determining aerobic growth, erythromycin sensitivity, and 
glycine tolerance. Out of 5 plasmids, a 2.9-kb plasmid (pLEB579) was 
successfully introduced into 4 chicken-originated wild-type L. crispatus 
strains. Transformation frequency was approximately 30 transformants per 
microgram of DNA, the first reported electrotransformation into 
chicken-originated L. crispatus. In spite of its low frequency, transformation 
enables bioengineering of these strains to improve the probiotic function in 
feed adsorption, chicken health, and food safety.

DOI: 10.1093/ps/83.1.45
PMID: 14761083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2015 Jun;60(6):580-8. doi: 10.1111/lam.12411. Epub 2015 Mar 
29.

Isolation and characterization of Bacillus subtilis CH16 strain from chicken 
gastrointestinal tracts for use as a feed supplement to promote weight gain in 
broilers.

Nguyen AT(1), Nguyen DV(1), Tran MT(1)(2), Nguyen LT(3), Nguyen AH(2), Phan 
TN(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Enzyme and Protein Technology, VNU University of Science, 
Hanoi, Vietnam.
(2)ANABIO Research & Development JSC, Ha Dong, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(3)DABACO Center for Veterinary Diagnostics, Khac Niem Industrial Zone, Bac 
Ninh, Vietnam.

Spore-forming bacterial strains were isolated from chicken gastrointestinal 
tracts to develop a heat-stable feed supplement that promotes weight gain in 
broilers. Seven Bacillus strains having more than 90% sporulation were screened 
from the isolates and identified to be closely related with Bacillus subtilis 
and Bacillus licheniformis. Of the seven strains, B. subtilis CH16 was selected 
to develop a feed supplement for broilers, because it formed 100% heat-stable 
spores, grew rapidly at 42°C and quickly formed a biofilm. In large-scale trials 
in broilers (n ≥ 1150 per group), the group fed CH16 (3 × 10(6) CFU g(-1) 
pellet) showed higher average daily gain (ADG = 61·16) and lower food conversion 
ratio (FCR = 1·696) than did the group fed B. licheniformis CH22 (ADG = 57·10 
and FCR = 1·792), the group fed B. subtilis HU58 (ADG = 51·90 and FCR = 1·868), 
BioPlus group (ADG = 59·32 and FCR = 1·807) and the control group (ADG = 56·02 
and FCR = 1·880). In conclusion, CH16 spores significantly increased ADG by 
9·17% and reduced FCR by 9·79% in broilers. The result supports the use of B. 
subtilis CH16 of chicken intestinal origin as a feed supplement that promote 
weight gain in broilers. Significance and impact of the study: This study 
reports screening of Bacillus strains isolated from chicken gastrointestinal 
tracts for development of a feed supplement that promote weight gain in 
broilers. Of the seven Bacillus isolates with high sporulation efficiency 
(≥90%), Bacillus subtilis CH16 strain showed the best growth and biofilm 
formation at body temperature of broilers (42°C). In large-scale trials in 
broilers (n ≥ 1150 per group), CH16 spores induced a 9·17% increase in daily 
weight gain (ADG) and a 9·79% reduction in FCR while the commercial BioPlus(®) 
YC induced only a 5·89% increase in ADG and a 3·88% reduction in FCR.

© 2015 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/lam.12411
PMID: 25754534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2005;40(5):391-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1472-765X.2005.01684.x.

Adherence and colonization properties of Lactobacillus rhamnosus TB1, a broiler 
chicken isolate.

Bouzaine T(1), Dauphin RD, Thonart P, Urdaci MC, Hamdi M.

Author information:
(1)UR-Microbial and Food Process, National Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology, University of Carthage, Tunis, Tunisia.

AIMS: Selected lactic acid bacteria (LAB) isolated from intestinal tract of 
chicken have been studied in order to investigate their ability to adhere in 
vitro to Basement Membrane Matrigel (BMM). A selected strain showing a good 
adherence in BMM test was used for in vivo colonization assays.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In vitro assessment of adhesion of broiler chicken isolates 
was performed using BMM assay. Among LAB strains tested, Lactobacillus rhamnosus 
TB1 showed a good adherence that was comparable to the one of an Escherichia 
coli EPEC strain used as positive control. For in vivo colonization assays this 
strain was fluorescently stained with the carboxyfluorescein diacetate 
succinimidyl ester (cFDA-SE) thus allowing its detection in different layers of 
intestinal tract after inoculation in broiler chicken. Further, stained L. 
rhamnosus were found with a highest value in rectum, jejunum and ileum both 3 
and 24 h after administration.
CONCLUSIONS: BMM assay is a quick method to test in vitro adhesion properties of 
bacterial strains and cFDA-SE-stained bacteria may be considered as an 
alternative method to test in vivo adhesion and colonization properties.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: Lactobacillus rhamnosus TB1 was therefore 
showed to be able to adhere strongly in vitro to BMM and in vivo to intestinal 
epithelial cells of chicken and may be considered as a potential probiotic for 
chicken.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1472-765X.2005.01684.x
PMID: 15836745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Bacteriol. 2012 Jun;194(11):3008-9. doi: 10.1128/JB.00344-12.

Genome sequence of Lactobacillus salivarius SMXD51, a potential probiotic strain 
isolated from chicken cecum, showing anti-campylobacter activity.

Kergourlay G(1), Messaoudi S, Dousset X, Prévost H.

Author information:
(1)LUNAM Université, Oniris, UMR1014 Secalim, Nantes, France.

We report the draft genome sequence of Lactobacillus salivarius SMXD51, isolated 
from the cecum of healthy chickens showing an activity against 
Campylobacter--the food-borne pathogen that is the most common cause of 
gastroenteritis in the European Union (EU)--and potentially interesting features 
for a probiotic strain, explaining our interest in it.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00344-12
PMCID: PMC3370615
PMID: 22582370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Can J Microbiol. 1999 Dec;45(12):981-7. doi: 10.1139/w99-102.

Some probiotic properties of chicken lactobacilli.

Gusils C(1), González SN, Oliver G.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Referencia para Lactobacilos, Tucumán, Argentina.

The beneficial effect of lactobacilli has been attributed to their ability to 
colonize human and animal gastrointestinal tracts. In this work, adhesion assays 
with three lactobacillus strains and intestinal fragments obtained from chickens 
were assessed. Lactobacillus animalis and L. fermentum were able to adhere to 
three kinds of epithelial cells (crop, small and large intestines) with 
predominance to small intestine. Among the strains considered, L. fermentum 
subsp. cellobiosus showed the lowest and L. animalis the highest adhesion 
ability. Scanning electron microphotographs showing L. animalis and L. fermentum 
adhering to intestinal cells were obtained. The characterization of L. animalis 
adhesion indicated that lectin-like structure of this strain has glucose/mannose 
as specific sugars of binding. However, a calcium requirement was not observed. 
The adhesion of L. fermentum was reduced by addition of sialic acid or mannose 
(P < 0.01). These carbohydrates can be involved in the interaction between 
adhesin and epithelial surface. In this case, the dependence on bivalent cations 
was demonstrated. Lactobacillus fermentum was effective in reducing the 
attachment of Salmonella pullorum by 77%, while L. animalis was able to inhibit 
(90%, 88%, and 78%) the adhesion of S. pullorum, S. enteritidis, and S. 
gallinarum to host-specific epithelial fragments respectively. Our results from 
this in vitro model suggest that these lactobacilli are able to block the 
binding sites for Salmonella adhesion.

DOI: 10.1139/w99-102
PMID: 10696476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Sci Rep. 2020 Oct 1;10(1):16259. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-73316-5.

Competitive reduction of poultry-borne enteric bacterial pathogens in chicken 
gut with bioactive Lactobacillus casei.

Tabashsum Z(1), Peng M(2), Alvarado-Martinez Z(1), Aditya A(2), Bhatti J(1), 
Romo PB(2), Young A(2), Biswas D(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Biological Sciences Program - Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of 
Maryland, College Park, MD, 20742, USA.
(2)Department of Animal and Avian Sciences, University of Maryland, College 
Park, MD, 20742, USA.
(3)Biological Sciences Program - Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of 
Maryland, College Park, MD, 20742, USA. dbiswas@umd.edu.
(4)Department of Animal and Avian Sciences, University of Maryland, College 
Park, MD, 20742, USA. dbiswas@umd.edu.
(5)Center for Food Safety and Security Systems, University of Maryland, College 
Park, MD, 20742, USA. dbiswas@umd.edu.

In this study, the effect of sustainable probiotics on Campylobacter jejuni 
colonization and gut microbiome composition was evaluated using chicken as a 
model organism. Chickens were given Lactobacillus casei over-expressing 
myosin-cross-reactive antigen (LC+mcra). LC+mcra can generate bioactive 
compounds in larger quantity including conjugated linoleic acid. A total of 120 
chickens were used in duplicate trials to investigate the effectiveness of 
LC+mcra in decreasing C. jejuni colonization by means of kanamycin resistant 
strain compared to the control group. We observed that LC+mcra can efficiently 
colonize various parts of the chicken gut and competitively reduce colonization 
of natural and challenged C. jejuni and natural Salmonella enterica. LC+mcra was 
found to reduce C. jejuni colonization in cecum, ileum and jejunum, by more than 
one log CFU/g when compared to the no-probiotic control group. Furthermore, 16S 
rRNA compositional analysis revealed lower abundance of Proteobacteria, higher 
abundance of Firmicutes, along with enriched bacterial genus diversity in gut of 
LC+mcra fed chicken. Decreased contamination of drinking water by C. jejuni and 
S. enterica was also observed, suggesting a potential function of reducing 
horizontal transfer of enteric bacteria in poultry. Outcomes of this study 
reveal high potential of LC+mcra as sustainable approach to decrease 
colonization of C. jejuni and S. enterica in poultry gut along with other 
beneficial attributes.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-73316-5
PMCID: PMC7530658
PMID: 33004922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


20. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35475. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035475. Epub 2012 Apr 13.

Effect of fructooligosaccharide metabolism on chicken colonization by an 
extra-intestinal pathogenic Escherichia coli strain.

Porcheron G(1), Chanteloup NK, Trotereau A, Brée A, Schouler C.

Author information:
(1)INRA, UMR1282 Infectiologie et Santé Publique, Nouzilly, France.

Extra-intestinal pathogenic Escherichia coli (ExPEC) strains cause many diseases 
in humans and animals. While remaining asymptomatic, they can colonize the 
intestine for subsequent extra-intestinal infection and dissemination in the 
environment. We have previously identified the fos locus, a gene cluster within 
a pathogenicity island of the avian ExPEC strain BEN2908, involved in the 
metabolism of short-chain fructooligosaccharides (scFOS). It is assumed that 
these sugars are metabolized by the probiotic bacteria of the microbiota present 
in the intestine, leading to a decrease in the pathogenic bacterial population. 
However, we have previously shown that scFOS metabolism helps BEN2908 to 
colonize the intestine, its reservoir. As the fos locus is located on a 
pathogenicity island, one aim of this study was to investigate a possible role 
of this locus in the virulence of the strain for chicken. We thus analysed fos 
gene expression in extracts of target organs of avian colibacillosis and 
performed a virulence assay in chickens. Moreover, in order to understand the 
involvement of the fos locus in intestinal colonization, we monitored the 
expression of fos genes and their implication in the growth ability of the 
strain in intestinal extracts of chicken. We also performed intestinal 
colonization assays in axenic and Specific Pathogen-Free (SPF) chickens. We 
demonstrated that the fos locus is not involved in the virulence of BEN2908 for 
chickens and is strongly involved in axenic chicken cecal colonization both in 
vitro and in vivo. However, even if the presence of a microbiota does not 
inhibit the growth advantage of BEN2908 in ceca in vitro, overall, growth of the 
strain is not favoured in the ceca of SPF chickens. These findings indicate that 
scFOS metabolism by an ExPEC strain can contribute to its fitness in ceca but 
this benefit is fully dependent on the bacteria present in the microbiota.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035475
PMCID: PMC3325963
PMID: 22514747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


21. Genome Announc. 2016 Nov 3;4(6):e01229-16. doi: 10.1128/genomeA.01229-16.

Draft Genome Sequences of Lactobacillus animalis Strain P38 and Lactobacillus 
reuteri Strain P43 Isolated from Chicken Cecum.

Rezvani M(1), Mendoza M(1), Koci MD(1), Daron C(2), Levy J(3), Hassan HM(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)Prestage Department of Poultry Science, North Carolina State University, 
Raleigh, North Carolina.
(2)Microbiology Graduate Program, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
North Carolina.
(3)RTI International, Durham, North Carolina.
(4)Prestage Department of Poultry Science, North Carolina State University, 
Raleigh, North Carolina hmhassan@ncsu.edu.

Here, we present the genome sequence of Lactobacillus animalis strain P38 and 
Lactobacillus reuteri strain P43, both isolated from the cecum content of a 
4-week old chicken fed a diet supplemented with the prebiotic 
β(1-4)galacto-oligosaccharide (GOS). These indigenous Lactobacillus isolates are 
potential probiotic organisms for poultry.

Copyright © 2016 Rezvani et al.

DOI: 10.1128/genomeA.01229-16
PMCID: PMC5095478
PMID: 27811108


22. Poult Sci. 2022 Nov;101(11):102136. doi: 10.1016/j.psj.2022.102136. Epub 2022 
Aug 15.

Characterizing the chicken gut colonization ability of a diverse group of 
bacteria.

Poudel B(1), Shterzer N(1), Sbehat Y(1), Ben-Porat N(1), Rakover M(1), 
Tovy-Sharon R(1), Wolicki D(1), Rahamim S(1), Bar-Shira E(1), Mills E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Science, Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food, 
and Environment, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot 7610001, Israel.
(2)Department of Animal Science, Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food, 
and Environment, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot 7610001, Israel. 
Electronic address: erez.mills@mail.huji.ac.il.

The development of probiotics for chickens is a rapidly expanding field. The 
main approach to probiotics is to administer the probiotic strain throughout the 
bird's life, usually through incorporation in the feed. However, probiotics 
which would utilize bacterial strains capable of permanently colonizing the gut 
after a single exposure are likely to have a greater impact on the developing 
gut community as well as on the host, would simplify probiotic use and also 
reduce costs in an industrial setting. Finally, very limited and conflicting 
information about the colonization ability of different bacterial strains has 
been reported. Here we report 2 colonization experiments using 14 different 
bacterial strains from diverse phylogenetic groups. In both experiments, groups 
of chicks were orally inoculated on the day of hatch with different bacterial 
strains that had been previously isolated from adult heavy breeders. In the 
first experiment, colonization of the bacterial strains in broiler chicks was 
determined 7 d after treatment. In the second experiment, colonization was 
followed in layer chicks until d 17. Ten of the bacterial strains, including 
Lactobacillales and Bacteroidales strains, were able to colonize chicks after a 
single exposure for the duration of the experiment. For a few of these strains, 
exposure had little effect compared to non-treated chicks due to natural 
background colonization. Only 4 strains failed to colonize the chicks. Moreover, 
it is shown that fecal samples are useful to identify and provide a dynamic view 
of colonization. We further analyzed the effects of artificial colonization on 
microbiota composition. Some of the strains used in this research were found to 
reduce Enterobacteriaceae family abundance, implying that they might be useful 
in reducing relevant pathogen levels. To conclude, our results show that the 
development of single exposure based probiotics is possible.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psj.2022.102136
PMCID: PMC9508342
PMID: 36152437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Benef Microbes. 2020 Mar 27;11(2):163-173. doi: 10.3920/BM2019.0116. Epub 2020 
Mar 5.

Lactobacillus plantarum S27 from chicken faeces as a potential probiotic to 
replace antibiotics: in vivo evidence.

Benbara T(1), Lalouche S(1), Drider D(2), Bendali F(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie Appliquée, Faculté des Sciences de la Nature et 
de la Vie, Université de Bejaia, Bejaia 06000, Algeria.
(2)EA 7394 Institut Charles Viollette, Université Lille, 59000 Lille, France.

This study reports the probiotic attributes of Lactobacillus strains isolated 
from chicken faeces and mainly their capabilities to prevent infectious diseases 
and improve chicken production performance. Thus, 22 Lactobacillus strains were 
isolated from 50 chickens' faeces samples and assessed for their resistance to 
gastric acidity (pH 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2 and 2.5), tolerance to bile salts, adherence 
to broiler intestinal cells and antibacterial activity. These in vitro screening 
analyses revealed Lactobacillus plantarum S22 and L. plantarum S27 as the only 
strains capable to survive at pH 2.0 in MRS broth (log10 cfu/ml=5.02 and 8.46 
log respectively), while the remaining strains were not resistant to pH≤2.0. 
Similarly, 21 strains were resistant to bile at 0.5% (log10 cfu/ml=0.09-3.32 
log), but only Lactobacillus fermentum S26, L. plantarum S22 and L. plantarum 
S27 were able to grow in the presence of 0.1% (w/v) bile (8.23±0.15; 8.39±0.17 
and 8.57±0.07 respectively). Most of these isolates (19/22) were active against 
Escherichia coli ATCC 25922, E. coli SL2016 and Salmonella enterica CIP 81-3. 
Lactic acid is likely the main antibacterial compound produced since the 
neutralised supernatant was devoid of any antibacterial activity. In vitro 
characterisation of these 22 novel strains, based on the aforementioned criteria 
revealed L. plantarum S27 as the most suitable strain for in vivo analyses. To 
this end, this strain was assessed for its sensitivity to different antibiotics 
and adhesion to poultry intestinal cells to ascertain it probiotic attributes. 
The administration of L. plantarum S27 to the chicks at 109 cfu/ml permitted to 
improve the animal food intake and weight. Taken together, data from in vitro 
and in vivo analyses indicated that L. plantarum S27 might be a worthy probiotic 
for chickens rather than adding antibiotics to animals feeding.

DOI: 10.3920/BM2019.0116
PMID: 32131607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Benef Microbes. 2012 Jun 1;3(2):137-44. doi: 10.3920/BM2011.0058.

Transfer of antibiotic resistance determinants between lactobacilli isolates 
from the gastrointestinal tract of chicken.

Vieira de Souza F(1), Roque R, Silva Moreira JL, Resende de Souza M, Nicoli JR, 
Neumann E, Cantini Nunes Á.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biologia Geral, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Campus 
Pampulha, Av. Antônio Carlos, 6627, 31270-901 Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to assess the potential horizontal transfer of genetic 
traits for antibiotic resistance between lactobacilli isolated from the chicken 
gut, both in vitro and in vivo. Thirty-seven Lactobacillus spp. strains isolated 
from the gizzard, small and large intestines and caeca of free-range broiler 
chickens showed multi-drug resistance as assessed by disc diffusion assays. The 
minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) for vancomycin, tetracycline, 
erythromycin and chloramphenicol was determined in De Man, Rogosa and Sharpe 
broth in a microplate assay. Almost all the lactobacilli isolates were resistant 
to vancomycin (except strains belonging to the Lactobacillus acidophilus group) 
and to tetracycline (MIC≥128 μg/ml). Only five strains were resistant to 
erythromycin, and six to chloramphenicol. The transfer rate in filter mating 
experiments performed using L. acidophilus strain 4M14E (EmR), Lactobacillus 
vaginalis strain 5M14E (CmR), Lactobacillus salivarius strain 5C14C (EmR), and 
the 4G14L and 3C14C strains of Lactobacillus reuteri (CmR) showed a frequency of 
approximately 1×104 cfu/ml of double-resistant transconjugants for the different 
combinations. The exception was the L. salivarius 5C14C (EmR) and L. vaginalis 
5M14E (CmR) mating combination, which produced no transconjugants. In vivo 
experiments performed in gnotobiotic mice by mating L. acidophilus 4M14E (EmR) 
with L. reuteri 3C14C (CmR), L. reuteri 4G14L (CmR) or L. vaginalis 5M14E (CmR) 
resulted in transconjugants at 3.95±0.29, 3.16±0.33, and 4.55±1.52 log10 cfu/g 
of faeces, respectively. Taken together, these data suggest that genetic 
exchange may occur between native bacterial strains within the gastrointestinal 
tract of chickens, which might maintain a dynamic gene pool conferring 
antibiotic resistance upon indigenous microbiota components, even in the absence 
of the pathogens. This possibility must be taken into account as a complementary 
criterion when lactobacilli are screened for probiotic use.

DOI: 10.3920/BM2011.0058
PMID: 22476322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. BMC Biotechnol. 2006 Jan 5;6:2. doi: 10.1186/1472-6750-6-2.

Genetic transformation of novel isolates of chicken Lactobacillus bearing 
probiotic features for expression of heterologous proteins: a tool to develop 
live oral vaccines.

Mota RM(1), Moreira JL, Souza MR, Horta MF, Teixeira SM, Neumann E, Nicoli JR, 
Nunes AC.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biologia Geral, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, 
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil. 
rodrigo_m_mota@yahoo.com.br

BACKGROUND: The use of lactic acid bacteria as vehicles to delivery antigens to 
immunize animals is a promising issue. When genetically modified, these bacteria 
can induce a specific local and systemic immune response against selected 
pathogens. Gastric acid and bile salts tolerance, production of antagonistic 
substances against pathogenic microorganisms, and adhesive ability to gut 
epithelium are other important characteristics that make these bacteria useful 
for oral immunization.
RESULTS: Bacteria isolated on de Man, Rogosa and Sharpe medium (MRS) from 
different gastrointestinal portions of broiler chicks were evaluated for their 
resistance to artificial gastric acid and bile salts, production of hydrogen 
peroxide, and cell surface hydrophobicity. Thirty-eight isolates were first 
typed at species level by PCR amplification of 16S-23S rRNA intergenic spacers 
using universal primers that anneal within 16S and 23S genes, followed by 
restriction digestion analyses of PCR amplicons (PCR-ARDRA). An expression 
cassette was assembled onto the pCR2.1-Topo vector by cloning the promoter, 
leader peptide, cell wall anchor and terminator sequences derived from the 
laminin binding S-layer protein gene of L. crispatus strain F5.7 (lbs gene). A 
sequence encoding the green fluorescent protein (GFP) was inserted as reporter 
gene, and an erythromycin resistance gene was added as selective marker. All 
constructs were able to express GFP in the cloning host E. coli XL1-Blue and 
different Lactobacillus strains as verified by FACS and laser scanning confocal 
microscopy.
CONCLUSION: Lactobacillus isolated from gastrointestinal tract of broiler 
chickens and selected for probiotic characteristics can be genetically modified 
by introducing an expression cassette into the lbs locus. The transformed 
bacteria expressed on its cell wall surface different fluorescent proteins used 
as reporters of promoter function. It is possible then that similar bacterial 
model expressing pathogen antigens can be used as live oral vaccines to immunize 
broilers against infectious diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6750-6-2
PMCID: PMC1360068
PMID: 16396687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2008 Feb;18(2):338-42.

Screening of Lactobacilli derived from chicken feces and partial 
characterization of Lactobacillus acidophilus A12 as an animal probiotics.

Lee NK(1), Yun CW, Kim SW, Chang HI, Kang CW, Paik HD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Animal Life Science, Konkuk University, Seoul 143-701, Korea.

This study was performed to screen and select Lactobacillus strains from chicken 
feces for probiotic use in animals. Of these strains, strain A12 had the highest 
immunostimulatory effect. Therefore, strain A12 was characterized as a potential 
probiotic. Strain A12 was tentatively identified as Lactobacillus acidophilus 
A12, using the API 50 CHL kit based on a 99.9% homology. L. acidophilus A12 was 
highly resistant to artificial gastric juice (pH 2.5) and bile acid (oxgall). 
Based on results from the API ZYM kit, leucine arylamidase, crystine 
arylamidase, acid phosphatase, naphthol-AS-BI-phosphohydrolase, 
alpha-galactosidase, beta- galactosidase, alpha-glucosidase, beta-glucosidase, 
and N-acetyl-beta- glucosamidase were produced by strain A12. L. acidophilus A12 
showed resistance to several antibiotics (nisin, gentamycin, and erythromycin). 
The amount of interleukin (IL)-1alpha in 20x concentrated supernatant from L. 
acidophilus A12 was approximately 156 pg/ml. With regard to antioxidant 
activity, L. acidophilus A12 supernatant showed 60.6% DPPH radical scavenging 
activity. These results demonstrate the potential use of L. acidophilus A12 as a 
health-promoting probiotics.

PMID: 18309281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. BMC Vet Res. 2020 Feb 3;16(1):34. doi: 10.1186/s12917-020-2238-5.

Effect of Lactobacillus spp. on adhesion, invasion, and translocation of 
Campylobacter jejuni in chicken and pig small-intestinal epithelial cell lines.

Šikić Pogačar M(1), Langerholc T(2), Mičetić-Turk D(3), Možina SS(4), Klančnik 
A(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Maribor, 2000, Maribor, Slovenia. 
maja_sikic@yahoo.com.au.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and 
Biotechnology, Faculty of Agriculture and Life Science, University of Maribor, 
2311, Hoče, Slovenia.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, University of Maribor, 2000, Maribor, Slovenia.
(4)Department of Food Science and Technology, Biotechnical Faculty, University 
of Ljubljana, 1000, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

BACKGROUND: Campylobacter spp. are a major cause of bacterial food-borne 
diarrhoeal disease. This mainly arises through contamination of meat products 
during processing. For infection, Campylobacter spp. must adhere to epithelial 
cells of the mucus layer, survive conditions of the gastrointestinal tract, and 
colonise the intestine of the host. Addition of probiotic bacteria might promote 
competitive adhesion to epithelial cells, consequently reducing Campylobacter 
jejuni colonisation. Effect of Lactobacillus spp. (PCS20, PCS22, PCS25, LGG, 
PCK9) on C. jejuni adhesion, invasion and translocation in pig (PSI cl.1) and 
chicken (B1OXI) small-intestine cell lines, as well as pig enterocytes (CLAB) 
was investigated.
RESULTS: Overall, in competitive adhesion assays with PSI cl.1 and CLAB cell 
monolayers, the addition of Lactobacillus spp. reduced C. jejuni adherence to 
the cell surface, and negatively affected the C. jejuni invasion. Interestingly, 
Lactobacillus spp. significantly impaired C. jejuni adhesion in 
three-dimensional functional PSI cl.1 and B1OXI cell models. Also, C. jejuni did 
not translocate across PSI cl.1 and B1OXI cell monolayers when co-incubated with 
probiotics. Among selected probiotics, Lactobacillus rhamnosus LGG was the 
strain that reduced adhesion efficacy of C. jejuni most significantly under 
co-culture conditions.
CONCLUSION: The addition of Lactobacillus spp. to feed additives in livestock 
nutrition might be an effective novel strategy that targets Campylobacter 
adhesion to epithelial cells, and thus prevents colonisation, reduces the 
transmission, and finally lowers the incidence of human campylobacteriosis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12917-020-2238-5
PMCID: PMC6998324
PMID: 32013961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


28. Microorganisms. 2019 Dec 11;7(12):684. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms7120684.

Synergistic Effects of Probiotics and Phytobiotics on the Intestinal Microbiota 
in Young Broiler Chicken.

Ren H(1), Vahjen W(1), Dadi T(1), Saliu EM(1), Boroojeni FG(1), Zentek J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Animal Nutrition, Freie Universität Berlin, Königin-Luise-Str. 
49, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Probiotics and phytobiotics have been studied as in-feed antibiotic alternatives 
for decades, yet there are no studies on their possible symbiotic effects. In 
the present study, newly hatched chickens were fed with feeds supplemented 
either with host-specific Lactobacillus strains (L. agilis and L. salivarius), 
commercial phytobiotics, or combinations of both. After 13 days of life, crops 
and caecums were analyzed for bacterial composition (16S rDNA sequencing, qPCR) 
and activity (bacterial metabolites). Crop and caecum samples were also used to 
study the ex vivo survival of a broiler-derived extended-spectrum beta-lactamase 
(ESBL) producing Escherichia coli strain. In the crop, combinations of 
probiotics and phytobiotics, but not their single application, increased the 
dominance of lactobacilli. The single application of phytobiotics reduced the 
metabolite concentrations in the crop, but certain combinations synergistically 
upregulated the metabolites. Changes in the qualitative and quantitative 
composition of the caecal microbiota were less pronounced than in the crop. 
Acetate concentrations were significantly lower for phytobiotics or the L. 
agilis probiotic strain compared to the control group, but the L. salivarius 
probiotic showed significantly higher acetate concentrations alone or in 
combination with one phytobiotic. The synergistic effects on the reduction of 
the ex vivo survival of an ESBL producing E. coli strain in crop or caecum 
contents were also observed for most combinations. This study shows the 
beneficial synergistic effects of probiotics and phytobiotics on the intestinal 
bacterial composition and their metabolic activity in young broilers. The 
reduced survival of potentially problematic bacteria, such as ESBL-producing E. 
coli further indicates that combinations of probiotics and phytobiotics may lead 
to a more enhanced functionality than their individual supplementation.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms7120684
PMCID: PMC6956037
PMID: 31835884

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


29. Microbiol Resour Announc. 2018 Oct 11;7(14):e00987-18. doi: 
10.1128/MRA.00987-18. eCollection 2018 Oct.

Whole-Genome Sequence of Lactobacillus salivarius DJ-sa-01, Isolated from 
Chicken Small Intestine.

Kim D(1), Cho MJ(1), Cho S(1), Lee Y(1), Byun SJ(2), Lee S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Jangan-gu, Suwon, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)Animal Biotechnology Division, National Institute of Animal Science, Rural 
Development Administration, Wanju-gun, Jeollabuk-do, Republic of Korea.

We have identified the whole-genome sequence of Lactobacillus salivarius 
DJ-sa-01, a potential probiotic strain for poultry, isolated from a chicken 
small intestine. We used the PacBio and Illumina platforms to obtain the 
sequence of the entire single circular chromosome.

DOI: 10.1128/MRA.00987-18
PMCID: PMC6256648
PMID: 30533717


30. Arch Microbiol. 2022 Nov 19;204(12):715. doi: 10.1007/s00203-022-03307-9.

Chicken embryos are a valuable model for the selection of Bacillus subtilis for 
probiotic purposes.

Dos Reis TFM(#)(1), Hoepers PG(#)(2), Azevedo VAC(3), da Silva GR(1), Notário 
FO(1), Soares MC(1), Schlemper AE(1), Costa ÍM(1), Coelho-Rocha ND(3), da Costa 
MS(4), Sommerfeld S(1), Medeiros-Ronchi AA(1), Rossi DA(1), de Castro IP(1), 
Fonseca BB(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine, Federal University of Uberlândia, Uberlândia, 
Brazil.
(2)School of Veterinary Medicine, Federal University of Uberlândia, Uberlândia, 
Brazil. patriciag.hoepers@gmail.com.
(3)Graduate Program in Genetics at the Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo 
Horizonte, Brazil.
(4)Graduate Program in Genetics and Biochemistry at the Federal University of 
Uberlândia, Uberlândia, Brazil.
(5)School of Veterinary Medicine, Federal University of Uberlândia, Uberlândia, 
Brazil. biafonseca@ufu.br.
(6)Graduate Program in Genetics and Biochemistry at the Federal University of 
Uberlândia, Uberlândia, Brazil. biafonseca@ufu.br.
(#)Contributed equally

Bacillus subtilis (BS) has been used as an excellent probiotic; however, some BS 
strains seem to be opportunist pathogens or do not present inhibitory effects in 
the pathogenic bacteria, so the characterization of BS strains for use in 
animals is mandatory. This study aimed to select nonpathogenic strains of BS, 
which can inhibit Salmonella spp., avian pathogenic Escherichia coli (APEC), and 
Campylobacter jejuni (CJ) using a chicken embryo as a model. We tested nine (9) 
strains of BS isolated from several sources (named A to I) in in vitro by tests 
of mucin degradation activity, haemolytic activity, apoptosis, and necrosis in 
fibroblasts from chickens. After the in vitro test, we tested the remaining 
seven (7) strains (strains A to G) in a chicken embryo (CE) as an in vivo model 
and target animal. We inoculated 3 log CFU/CE of each strain via allantoic fluid 
at the 10th day postincubation (DPI). Each treatment group consisted of eight 
CEs. At the 17th DPI we checked CE mortality, gross lesions, CE weight, and 
whether BS strains were still viable. To perform the cytokine, total protein, 
albumin, and reactive C protein analysis, we collected the CE blood from the 
allantoic vessel and intestine fragments in the duodenum portion for 
histomorphometric analysis. After the results in CEs, we tested the inhibition 
capacity of the selected BS strains for diverse strains of Salmonella  
Heidelberg (SH), S. Typhimurium (ST), S. Enteritidis (SE), S. Minnesota (SM), S. 
Infantis (SI), Salmonella var. monophasic (SVM), APEC and C. jejuni. After the 
in vitro trial (mucin degradation activity, haemolytic activity, apoptosis, and 
necrosis), we removed two (2) strains (H and I) that showed β-haemolysis, mucin 
degradation, and/or high apoptosis and necrosis effects. Although all strains of 
BS were viable in CEs at the 17th DPI, we removed four (4) strains (A, B, D, F) 
once they led to the highest mortality in CEs or a high albumin/protein ratio. 
C. jejuni inoculated with strain G had greater weight than the commercial 
strain, which could be further used for egg inoculation with benefits to the CE. 
From the tests in CEs, we selected the strains C, E, and G for their ability to 
inhibit pathogenic strains of relevant foodborne pathogens. We found that the 
inhibition effect was strain dependent. In general, strains E and/or G presented 
better or similar results than commercial control strains in the inhibition of 
SH, ST, SI, APEC, and two (2) strains of CJ. In this study, we selected BS 
strains C, E and G due to their in vitro and in vivo safety and beneficial 
effects. In addition, we emphasize the value of CE as an in vivo experimental 
model for assessing BS's safety and possible benefits for poultry and other 
animals.

© 2022. This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the 
US; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-022-03307-9
PMID: 36400871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Zoonoses Public Health. 2013 Mar;60(2):141-8. doi: 
10.1111/j.1863-2378.2012.01510.x. Epub 2012 Jun 6.

Interaction of Campylobacter spp. and human probiotics in chicken intestinal 
mucus.

Ganan M(1), Martinez-Rodriguez AJ, Carrascosa AV, Vesterlund S, Salminen S, 
Satokari R.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Nutrición, Bromatología y Tecnología de los Alimentos, 
Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. mganan@vet.ucm.es

Campylobacter is the most common cause of bacterial food-borne diarrhoeal 
disease throughout the world. The principal risk of human contamination is 
handling and consumption of contaminated poultry meat. To colonize poultry, 
Campylobacter adheres to and persists in the mucus layer that covers the 
intestinal epithelium. Inhibiting adhesion to the mucus could prevent 
colonization of the intestine. The aim of this study was to investigate in vitro 
the protective effect of defined commercial human probiotic strains on the 
adhesion of Campylobacter spp. to chicken intestinal mucus, in a search for 
alternatives to antibiotics to control this food-borne pathogen. The probiotic 
strains Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Propionibacterium freudenreichii ssp. 
shermanii JS and a starter culture strain Lactococcus lactis ssp. lactis adhered 
well to chicken intestinal mucus and were able to reduce the binding of 
Campylobacter spp. when the mucus was colonized with the probiotic strain before 
contacting the pathogen. Human-intended probiotics could be useful as 
prophylactics in poultry feeding for controlling Campylobacter spp. 
colonization.

© 2012 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1863-2378.2012.01510.x
PMID: 22672405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Microorganisms. 2022 Mar 28;10(4):726. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms10040726.

Lactobacillus salivarius CML352 Isolated from Chinese Local Breed Chicken 
Modulates the Gut Microbiota and Improves Intestinal Health and Egg Quality in 
Late-Phase Laying Hens.

Xu C(1), Wei F(1), Yang X(1), Feng Y(1), Liu D(1), Hu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.

Lactobacillus strains with fine probiotic properties are continuously needed in 
the laying hen industry to improve the animals' gut health and production 
performance. In this study, we isolated 57 Lactobacillus strains from the gut 
microbiota of 17 different chicken breeds in China. We characterized the 
probiotic features of these isolates, and evaluated the effects of a selected 
strain, Lactobacillus salivarius CML352, on the production performance and gut 
health of the late-phase laying hens. The results showed that the isolates 
varied much in probiotic properties, among which L. salivarius CML352 displayed 
high acid and bile salt tolerance, high hydrophobicity, auto-aggregation, and 
antibacterial activities. Whole genome sequencing analysis showed that CML352 
was closely related to a strain isolated from human fecal samples, but had 
different functional potentials. Dietary supplementary of L. salivarius CML352 
significantly reduced the Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratio, increased the 
expression of Muc-2, and decreased the expression of MyD88, IFN-γ, and TLR-4. 
Furthermore, strain CML352 reduced the birds' abdominal fat deposition, and 
improved egg quality. Taken together, this study indicated that the newly 
isolated L. salivarius strain might be a worthy probiotic with positive impacts 
on the intestinal health and production performance of late-phase laying hens.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms10040726
PMCID: PMC9029475
PMID: 35456777

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


33. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2022 Nov;75(5):1160-1170. doi: 10.1111/lam.13783. Epub 2022 
Jul 19.

Synergistic effects of probiotic Bifidobacterium isolated from chicken's 
intestine in combination with polyvinylpyrrolidone on reduction of aflatoxin 
B(1).

Aalipanah S(1), Fazeli MR(2), Akhavan Sepahi A(1), Shariatmadari F(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Islamic Azad 
University, North Tehran Branch, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Drug and Food Control, Pharmaceutical Quality Assurance 
Research Center, Faculty of Pharmacy, Tehran University, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat 
Modares University, Tehran, Iran.

Food contamination with aflatoxin is one of the most critical concerns of health 
professionals. One of the best ways to reduce aflatoxin content in food is 
probiotics. Therefore, this study was performed to isolate Bifidobacterium from 
the chick's intestine; evaluate its probiotic activities and its application 
with Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) to reduce aflatoxin B1 (AFB1 ) in the medium 
were investigated. Samples were isolated from the chick's intestine, and 
Bifidobacterium was isolated and identified by biochemical and molecular 
methods. Next, the potential probiotic characterization was assessed. 
Afterwards, the effect of selected isolate and PVP on reducing AFB1 in the 
medium was studied using ELISA and HPLC. Biochemical and molecular evaluations 
indicated isolation of Bifidobacterium bifidum strain from chick's intestine. 
One of the B. bifidum strains was selected for the next steps, which showed 
potential probiotic characterization and the ability to reduce the concentration 
of AFB1 in the medium (50% reduction). When used in combination with PVP showed 
synergistic effects in reducing the concentration of AFB1 from the medium (up to 
90%). In the conclusion, it was found that selected B. bifidum strains and PVP 
could have synergistic effects in reducing AFB1 toxin in a medium up to 90%.

© 2022 Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/lam.13783
PMID: 35778982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Microbiol Resour Announc. 2018 Nov 21;7(20):e01251-18. doi: 
10.1128/MRA.01251-18. eCollection 2018 Nov.

Complete Genome Sequence of Lactobacillus reuteri SKKU-OGDONS-01, Isolated from 
a Chicken's Small Intestine.

Kim D(1), Cho MJ(1), Cho S(1), Lee Y(1), Byun SJ(2), Lee S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Seobu-ro, 
Jangan-gu, Suwon-si, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea.
(2)Animal Biotechnology Division, National Institute of Animal Science, Rural 
Development Administration, Kongjwipatjwi-ro, Iseo-myeon, Wanju_Gun, 
Jeollabuk-do, Republic of Korea.

Lactobacillus reuteri SKKU-OGDONS-01 is a potentially indigenous probiotic 
strain isolated from the small intestine of a 27-week-old chicken. The complete 
genome of L. reuteri SKKU-OGDONS-01 comprises a single circular chromosome. Its 
length is 2,259,968 bp, with a G+C content of 38.9%.

DOI: 10.1128/MRA.01251-18
PMCID: PMC6256620
PMID: 30533821


35. Vet World. 2022 Feb;15(2):324-330. doi: 10.14202/vetworld.2022.324-330. Epub 
2022 Feb 14.

Efficacy of dietary supplementary probiotics as substitutes for antibiotic 
growth promoters during the starter period on growth performances, carcass 
traits, and immune organs of male layer chicken.

Agustono B(1), Lokapirnasari WP(1), Yunita MN(2), Kinanti RN(3), Cesa AE(3), 
Windria S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Science, Division of Animal Husbandry, Faculty of 
Veterinary Medicine, Universitas Airlangga, Surabaya, Indonesia.
(2)Department of Veterinary Science, Division of Pathology Veteriner, Faculty of 
Veterinary Medicine, Universitas Airlangga, Surabaya, Indonesia.
(3)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Universitas Airlangga, Surabaya, Indonesia.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Division of Microbiology, Veterinary 
Medicine Study Program, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Padjadjaran, Bandung, 
Indonesia.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: With the increased concerns about global protein supply, 
chicken meat, especially from male layer chicken, constitutes an alternative in 
terms of quality and carcass traits. Probiotics have been proposed for replacing 
antibiotic growth promoters (AGPs), which have been prohibited as poultry 
supplement feeds. The present study aimed to determine the efficacy of dietary 
supplementary probiotics during the starter period on growth performances, 
carcass traits, and immune organs of male layer chicken.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, one hundred and eighty 1-day-old male 
chicks from the strain ISA brown were used. They were divided into six groups 
according to the feed: 100% basal feed (T0), basal feed+2.5 g AGP/kg feed (T1), 
basal feed+probiotics 1 mL/kg feed (T2), basal feed+probiotics 3 mL/kg feed 
(T3), basal feed+probiotics 4 mL/kg feed (T4), and basal feed+probiotics 5 mL/kg 
feed (T5). Probiotics (Lactobacillus acidophilus, Lactobacillus plantarum, and 
Bifidobacterium spp.) were given at a concentration of 1.2×109 colony-forming 
unit/mL. Virginiamycin was used as AGP. ISA brown layer chicken was treated for 
21 days. Growth performances (body weight, feed consumption, and feed conversion 
ratio [FCR]), carcass traits (weight at slaughter, weight of the carcass, breast 
muscles, liver, lungs, kidneys, and heart), immune organs (spleen, thymus, and 
bursa of Fabricius), and non-edible organs (head, legs, and wings) were 
analyzed.
RESULTS: Probiotic supplementation at 4 and 5 mL/kg feed (T4 and T5) during the 
starter phase improved the body weight, FCR, and feed consumption. The weight at 
slaughter, weight of the carcass, breast muscles, and liver from the T4 and T5 
groups were significantly greater than those in the other treatment groups. In 
addition, the weight of the heart, lungs, and kidneys was increased in the T1, 
T2, T3, T4, and T5 groups compared with that measured in the T0 group. 
Furthermore, there were significant differences regarding the immune organs 
between the T0 and the other treatment groups. The weight of the head, legs, and 
wings was also greater in the probiotic and AGP supplementation groups (T1, T2, 
T3, T4, and T5) than that in the basal feed group (T0).
CONCLUSION: Probiotic (L. acidophilus, L. plantarum, and Bifidobacterium spp.) 
supplementation at 4 and 5 mL/kg feed during the starter period can be used to 
improve the growth, carcass traits, and weight of immune organs in male layer 
chicken.

Copyright: © Agustono, et al.

DOI: 10.14202/vetworld.2022.324-330
PMCID: PMC8980395
PMID: 35400938

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


36. Microbiol Resour Announc. 2020 Sep 24;9(39):e00501-20. doi: 
10.1128/MRA.00501-20.

Complete Genome Sequences of Lactobacillus Strains C25 and P38, Isolated from 
Chicken Cecum.

Hassan HM(1), Mendoza M(2), Rezvani M(2), Koci MD(2), Dickey AN(3), Scholl 
EH(3).

Author information:
(1)Prestage Department of Poultry Science, North Carolina State University, 
Raleigh, North Carolina, USA hmhassan@ncsu.edu.
(2)Prestage Department of Poultry Science, North Carolina State University, 
Raleigh, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Bioinformatics Research Center, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
North Carolina, USA.

We report the complete circular genome sequences of Lactobacillus crispatus 
strain C25, its plasmid, and Lactobacillus animalis strain P38; both strains 
were isolated from the cecum of 4-week-old chickens. These isolates represent 
potential probiotic strains for poultry.

Copyright © 2020 Hassan et al.

DOI: 10.1128/MRA.00501-20
PMCID: PMC7516137
PMID: 32972926


37. J Microbiol Methods. 2005 Mar;60(3):353-63. doi: 10.1016/j.mimet.2004.10.013.

Modified electroporation protocol for Lactobacilli isolated from the chicken 
crop facilitates transformation and the use of a genetic tool.

Mason CK(1), Collins MA, Thompson K.

Author information:
(1)Queen's University of Belfast, Newforge Lane, Belfast, BT9 5PX, Northern 
Ireland, UK.

Isolates of Lactobacillus spp. from a collection of potentially probiotic 
strains isolated from the crops of broiler chickens were found to be 
non-electrotransformable using published techniques. One strain of Lactobacillus 
salivarius was shown to develop electrocompetence when an overnight culture was 
incubated in fresh medium. The effect was enhanced if glycine was incorporated 
into the fresh growth medium. When these modifications were applied to a number 
of other crop isolates of Lactobacillus spp., electrocompetence could be 
detected in approximately half the strains tested. Two temperature sensitive 
plasmid vectors that had been used for the genetic modification of other lactic 
acid bacteria were introduced into a crop strain of Lb. salivarius. Both showed 
temperature sensitivity at 42 degrees C and above but were relatively stable at 
37 degrees C. The genetic tool harbouring an IS element allowed the delivery of 
the plasmid to multiple independent sites in the host chromosome. Harnessing 
such genetic tools will facilitate the future genetic analysis of the host 
bacterium.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mimet.2004.10.013
PMID: 15649537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Microbiologyopen. 2017 Oct;6(5):e00512. doi: 10.1002/mbo3.512. Epub 2017 Jul 24.

In vitro characteristics of Lactobacillus spp. strains isolated from the chicken 
digestive tract and their role in the inhibition of Campylobacter colonization.

Kobierecka PA(1), Wyszyńska AK(1), Aleksandrzak-Piekarczyk T(2), Kuczkowski 
M(3), Tuzimek A(1), Piotrowska W(1), Górecki A(1), Adamska I(4), Wieliczko A(3), 
Bardowski J(2), Jagusztyn-Krynicka EK(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Biology, Department of Bacterial Genetics, Institute of 
Microbiology, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Polish Academy of Sciences, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Warsaw, 
Poland.
(3)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Epizootiology and the Clinic of 
Birds and Exotic Animals, University of Environmental and Life Sciences, 
Wrocław, Poland.
(4)Faculty of Biology, Department of Animal Physiology, Institute of Zoology, 
University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.

Campylobacter jejuni/coli infections are the leading cause of bacterial 
diarrheal illnesses in humans. Many epidemiological studies indicate that 
improperly prepared meat from chickens that carry a high load of Campylobacter 
in their intestinal tracts is the key source of human infections. LAB, mainly 
members of the Lactococcus and Lactobacillus genera, increasingly have been 
tested as vehicles for the delivery of heterologous bacterial or viral antigens 
to animal mucosal immune systems. Thus, the objective of this study was to 
isolate, identify, and characterize Lactobacillus spp. strains isolated from 
chickens bred in Poland. Their ability to decrease the level of bird gut 
colonization by C. jejuni strain was also analyzed. First, the influence of the 
different chicken rearing systems was evaluated, especially the effect of diets 
on the Lactobacillus species that colonize the gut of chickens. Next, selected 
strains were analyzed in terms of their anti-Campylobacter activity in vitro; 
potential probiotic traits such as adhesion properties, bile and low pH 
tolerance; and their ability to grow on a defined carbon source. Given that 
improperly prepared chicken meat is the main source of human infection by 
Campylobacter, the selected strains were also assessed for their ability to 
inhibit Campylobacter colonization in the bird's intestine. These experiments 
revealed enormous physiological diversity among the Lactobacillus genus strains. 
Altogether, our results showed that L. plantarum strains isolated from the 
digestive tracts of chickens bred in Poland displayed some probiotic attributes 
in vitro and were able to decrease the level of bird gut colonization by C. 
jejuni strain. This suggests that they can be employed as vectors to deliver 
Campylobacter immunodominant proteins to the bird's immune system to strengthen 
the efficacy of in ovo vaccination.

© 2017 The Authors. MicrobiologyOpen published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/mbo3.512
PMCID: PMC5635155
PMID: 28736979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Antibiotics (Basel). 2022 Aug 24;11(9):1147. doi: 10.3390/antibiotics11091147.

The Detection of Potential Native Probiotics Lactobacillus spp. against 
Salmonella Enteritidis, Salmonella Infantis and Salmonella Kentucky ST198 of 
Lebanese Chicken Origin.

El Hage R(1)(2), El Hage J(3), Snini SP(2), Ammoun I(4), Touma J(1), Rachid 
R(1), Mathieu F(2), Sabatier JM(5), Abi Khattar Z(6), El Rayess Y(7).

Author information:
(1)Food Microbiology Laboratory, Lebanese Agricultural Research Institute 
(LARI), Fanar Station, Jdeideh El-Metn P.O. Box 901965, Lebanon.
(2)Laboratoire de Génie Chimique, UMR 5503 CNRS/INPT/UPS, INP-ENSAT, 1, 
Université de Toulouse, Avenue de l'Agrobiopôle, 31326 Castanet-Tolosan, France.
(3)Animal Health Laboratory, Lebanese Agricultural Research Institute (LARI), 
Fanar Station, Jdeideh El-Metn P.O. Box 901965, Lebanon.
(4)Milk and Milk Products Laboratory, Lebanese Agricultural Research Institute 
(LARI), Fanar Station, Jdeideh El-Metn P.O. Box 901965, Lebanon.
(5)CNRS UMR 7051, INP, Inst Neurophysiopathol, Aix-Marseille Université, 13385 
Marseille, France.
(6)Microbiology/Tox-Ecotoxicology Team, Laboratory of Georesources, Geosciences 
and Environment (L2GE), Faculty of Sciences 2, Lebanese University, Campus 
Fanar, Jdeideh El-Metn P.O. Box 90656, Lebanon.
(7)Faculty of Agricultural and Food Sciences, Holy Spirit University of Kaslik, 
Jounieh P.O. Box 446, Lebanon.

Salmonella continues to be a major threat to public health, especially with 
respect to strains from a poultry origin. In recent years, an increasing trend 
of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in Salmonella spp. was observed due to the 
misuse of antibiotics. Among the approaches advised for overcoming AMR, 
probiotics from the Lactobacillus genus have increasingly been considered for 
use as effective prophylactic and therapeutic agents belonging to the indigenous 
microbiota. In this study, we isolated lactobacilli from the ilea and ceca of 
hens and broilers in order to evaluate their potential probiotic properties. 
Four species were identified as Limosilactobacillusreuteri (n = 22, 45.8%), 
Ligilactobacillussalivarius (n = 20, 41.6%), Limosilactobacillus fermentum (n = 
2, 4.2%) and Lactobacillus crispatus (n = 1, 2%), while three other isolates (n 
= 3, 6.25%) were non-typable. Eight isolates, including 
Ligilactobacillussalivarius (n = 4), Limosilactobacillusreuteri (n = 2), L. 
crispatus (n = 1) and Lactobacillus spp. (n = 1) were chosen on the basis of 
their cell surface hydrophobicity and auto/co-aggregation ability for further 
adhesion assays using the adenocarcinoma cell line Caco-2. The adhesion rate of 
these strains varied from 0.53 to 10.78%. Ligilactobacillussalivarius A30/i26 
and 16/c6 and Limosilactobacillus reuteri 1/c24 showed the highest adhesion 
capacity, and were assessed for their ability to compete in and exclude the 
adhesion of Salmonella to the Caco-2 cells. Interestingly, 
Ligilactobacillussalivarius 16/c6 was shown to significantly exclude the 
adhesion of the three Salmonella serotypes, S. Enteritidis, S. Infantis and S. 
Kentucky ST 198, to Caco-2 cells. The results of the liquid co-culture assays 
revealed a complete inhibition of the growth of Salmonella after 24 h. 
Consequently, the indigenous Ligilactobacillussalivarius 16/c6 strain shows 
promising potential for use as a preventive probiotic added directly to the diet 
for the control of the colonization of Salmonella spp. in poultry.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics11091147
PMCID: PMC9495222
PMID: 36139927

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.


40. Genome Announc. 2016 Nov 3;4(6):e01223-16. doi: 10.1128/genomeA.01223-16.

Draft Genome Sequence of Lactobacillus crispatus C25 Isolated from Chicken 
Cecum.

Rezvani M(1), Mendoza M(1), Koci MD(1), Daron C(2), Levy J(3), Hassan HM(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)Prestage Department of Poultry Science, North Carolina State University, 
Raleigh, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Microbiology Graduate Program, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
North Carolina, USA.
(3)RTI International, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA.
(4)Prestage Department of Poultry Science, North Carolina State University, 
Raleigh, North Carolina, USA hmhassan@ncsu.edu.

Lactic acid bacteria are important members of the gut microbiota of humans and 
animals. Here, we present the genome sequence of Lactobacillus crispatus strain 
C25, originally isolated from the cecum of 4-week-old chicken fed a standard 
diet. This isolate represents a potential probiotic strain for poultry.

Copyright © 2016 Rezvani et al.

DOI: 10.1128/genomeA.01223-16
PMCID: PMC5095473
PMID: 27811103


41. Front Microbiol. 2022 Jul 8;13:910616. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.910616. 
eCollection 2022.

Bacillus subtilis PS-216 Spores Supplemented in Broiler Chicken Drinking Water 
Reduce Campylobacter jejuni Colonization and Increases Weight Gain.

Šimunović K(1)(2), Sahin O(3), Erega A(1)(2), Štefanič P(2), Zhang Q(4), Mandic 
Mulec I(2), Smole Možina S(1), Klančnik A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Science and Technology, Biotechnical Faculty, University 
of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Biotechnical Faculty, University of Ljubljana, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(3)Veterinary Diagnostic and Production Animal Medicine, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States.
(4)Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive Medicine, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States.

Campylobacter jejuni is the leading cause of bacterial gastroenteritis, or 
campylobacteriosis, in humans worldwide, and poultry serves as a major source of 
infection. To reduce the risk associated with C. jejuni transmission via poultry 
meat, effective interventions during poultry production are needed, and the use 
of probiotics is a promising approach. In this study, 15 Bacillus subtilis 
strains were initially screened for their anti-Campylobacter activities. B. 
subtilis PS-216 strain demonstrated the best anti-Campylobacter activity against 
15 C. jejuni isolates when examined using in vitro co-cultures. To evaluate the 
suitability of B. subtilis PS-216 for probiotic use, its susceptibility to eight 
clinically important antimicrobials and simulated gastric conditions was 
investigated. B. subtilis PS-216 was sensitive to all of the tested antibiotics. 
Although vegetative cells were sensitive to gastric conditions, B. subtilis 
PS-216 spores were highly resistant. We further evaluated the use of a B. 
subtilis PS-216 spore preparation (2.5 × 106 CFU/mL water) to prevent and/or 
reduce C. jejuni colonization in broiler chickens in vivo. Compared to the 
untreated group, significantly lower Campylobacter counts were detected in caeca 
of broilers continuously treated with B. subtilis PS-216 spores in their 
drinking water. Furthermore, broilers continuously treated with B. subtilis 
PS-216 spores showed improved weight gain, compared to the control group. 
Together, these results demonstrate the potential of B. subtilis PS-216 for use 
in poultry to reduce C. jejuni colonization and improve weight gain.

Copyright © 2022 Šimunović, Sahin, Erega, Štefanič, Zhang, Mandic Mulec, Smole 
Možina and Klančnik.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.910616
PMCID: PMC9304915
PMID: 35875550

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.